Freelancer BINI tools

To use the tools, just list all files that you want to covert on the
command line. You can achieve this effect in Windows by dragging and
dropping any files you want converted onto the executable files.

Example:

  unbini market_commodities.ini effects_explosion.ini

The unpacked files will have the same name but with a .txt extension
added. For the above example, the unpacked files will be:

  market_commodities.ini.txt
  effects_explosion.ini.txt

When repacking the files with bini (bini.exe), the .txt extention is
removed. If an original file already exists, it is backed up (see
BACKUP below). If no .txt extension is on the file, .ini is added
instead.

If a file is supplied to with the name "-", the tools will use
stdin. If "-" is supplied as an input file and no output file is
specified, or of "-" is specified as the output file, the tools will
use stdout for output.

These tools also have extra options for analyzing the BINI files and
making special edits. Use the -h option flag to see these options:

  unbini -h

Both tools have been tested with every BINI file that comes with
Freelancer and are able to freely convert back and forth with no data
loss or damage. These tools are meant to be used in conjunction with
one another. Do not mix these tools with any other BINI tools as they
will not work. These BINI tools are the only known tools that can
convert back and forth from text format without error.

In order to operate with other tools who want to read plain text
files, unbini has a -w switch which will produce compatible
output. This output will have the syntax that other tools are looking
for. However, this file will not be readable by the BINI packing tool
in this package. This is because this output file is ambiguous (it can
represent many different possible BINI files). Don't edit files
produced with the -w switch and expect to repack the file.

TEXT FILES
----------

All of the *.ini files in the Freelancer directory tree are binary
encoded files (dubbed BINI for binary ini?) that are not easily
editable by hand. These two tools allow a user to convert this BINI
files into an easily editable text file using "unbini". Once editing
is complete, the text file is converted back into a BINI file.

The text version looks like this:


["Section Title"]
"entry name" = 1, -1, 1.0, -1.0, "a string"
"empty entry"
"third entry" = "C:\\freelancer\\freelancer.exe"

["An Empty Section"]


All non-quoted whitespace is ignored, so you can freely add space and
empty lines and such as much as you want.

NUMBERS
-------

There are two types of numbers: integers and floating points. Integers
are signed and have no decimal component. Floating points are any
signed number with a decimal. It is strongly advised that, when
editing Freelancer files, you keep floats as floats (by leaving the
decimal point in the number) and integers are integers (by having no
decimal point).

STRINGS
-------

Every string value, including section and entry names, must be wrapped
in a quote pair. Quotes and backslashes inside the quotes must be
escaped with a backslash:

"A \"quoted\" word and a backslash: \\."

will be interpreted as:

A "quoted" word and a backslash \.

All other characters are legal inside the quotes.

Why all these quotes? This gaurantees that the BINI file and the text
file are equally expressive and that there is a one-to-one mapping of
each BINI file to each text version.

COMMENTS
--------

You can also comment your text file with a # character. Comments are
not encoded into the BINI file in any way. This means unpacking your
own BINI files will not recover your comments.

Example:

["Section"]  # This is a comment
"entry" = 10 # This is another comment

# a comment for a group of entries:
"entry1"
"entry2" = "some value" 

BACKUPS
-------

When bini converts a text file back into a BINI file, it will check to
see if the BINI file already exists. If so, it will back it up (adding
a .bak extension), with one exception. If the backup already exists,
no backup is made. This way, the tools will automatically back up your
original Freelancer files and never overwrite those backups. You can
restore the original file at anytime by removing the .bak extension.
